A DAYTIME BATH
My eyes are heavy with ambers of slumber…so heavily hitting the lids that everytime I
blink it hurts as much as pressing of foot under a stone.
Wondering about the ordinary prospect of about to be cooked and catered the quotidian
‘paranthas’, I empty the first mug of ice chilling water onto the black plume shrouding my
skull. A hairy drapery covering not only my head but the rest of body too—till toe. I could
never reckon whether it was after puberty or circadianly pre-planned long before, but the
Ganges’ depth much extent to which the follicles would have had themselves rooted in the
dermal layer so to render me smothered in a hilarious hoard of hair seems gnarly.
I spill another mug of marrow clogging waters. Haah! With the mere exception of
yesterday, it’s been nearly a week since our stomachs are being sheerly stacked with stuffed
bread. It ain’t that yiking to swallow down but buddy, the gut revokes.
The bucket is half empty now. As I approach to turn open the tap, another melancholic
musing occurs to me. “I’ve not mugged up the chemical formulae of carbon compounds!”
More eminent than that, to conceive me seated affixed in frigid but silent ambience of the
exam room where the paper’s taunting my already aching eyeballs to dejectedly sink in it
makes me recoil. The ditch of questions will have me roving around for answers.
Nevertheless, I take hold of the skimmy soap and—dogmatically penetrating the
fingers into its strong smelling mould—lowkey rub the bar all over the body so to clad myself
in frothy lather. Not a blink’s duration after I sit acquiring the vacant place, the prejudiced
“knock-knock” reverberates—vaporising my limerent broodings. I remorse for intrusion amid
the meek contemplations, but inside bathrooms we all are aloof.
“How long will yuh take? We’re getting’ late. Scurry!”. And, the Father’s thundering
voice alarms my drowsy soul.
\
I long to drown in seawater on this frosty day. In a sea with its shores erstwhile
marooned by any human but the Begetter…
-Pawan
