A Dream
Scurrying amidst the dense thickets, I was grasped hand in hand by Tatya ji; both of us
retracing her footsteps. Despite of us panting hard to bring in more air, Lakshmi ji could not
help mustering more of her valour intertwined with patriotism up in our weary but pulsing
veins. “The undispatched delegation urging urgently for besieging the Gwalior Fort should
be rendering us lunatically lithe to keep pursuing our exodus away from the sepoys,” said
she in a tone of ecstasy.
Albeit the storming downpour outside is no match to the never ending blaze of August, so
to shimmer me from the shrewish self, additionally appeared she herself— the greatly
gormful of all the girls (in the long suppressed but eventually won Struggle for
Independence).
Whilst contemplating the chivalrous ‘Chabbili’, it would be equally as well as in sequel
worthy to allude it all with a vision for ‘Bharatdesh’. The country is in a twofold advantage—
(1) hiking in HDI rankings plus, (2) increment in youth population. Along with the burgeoning
of new age ideologies, bustle bouts of fruitful desires casketed by them. To do good deed in
the name of nation might perhaps have been the mainstream notion; but the hurdles
nevertheless unleash in our pursuit for germinating of what’s anything but faery.
After brooding about it in another sleek siesta, I came to decipher so that the Rani’s efforts
may be shrunk to her mere intentions for conveying to me a sense of staunch selflessness.
As was her saying, If anything could be devoted as a favour to the motherland it’d be more
of the Indian’s alliances if not supreme or subdued allegiance. The Mardani insisted on
curtailing the few stemming vestiges of deceiving demons lurking our gooey solidarity
whenever recognised on the brisk of instability; for it shalst ensure but banishing of yet
another wriggling backstab.
I reckon the wise but widow lady was much intentional in inclining me toward advocacy for
brotherly infatuation thereby, pulling the helpless masses out of poignancy due to poverty.
Talking of her wrecked matrimonial auspiciousness after the Maharaja’s demise, it would be
soaringly unjustifiable to claim her childhood as neglected or deprived as it could be in the
old times. Fortunately, with similitude to the majestic martyr, one can nowadays count on
several girl children in the locality endearing to eagerly talk with anyone wanting to narrate
life to them sheerly unimaginably. But where those spirited ways might have been scorned
in the fellow women, they would remark of their ability to carve hallmarks in every
cornerstone of bleak fiminity.
Quite a few recurrences have been so and so that one may find himself prejudiced in
conceiving the poor unable of forbearance in hunt of meagre moneys. On the other hand, if
the very people were backed with indulgence, alleviation and, transparency in governance,
the heavenly Bird of Gold might have been sooner or later restored.
Speaking without ambiguity, I am myself much biased in my opinion about Home Rule.
Along with draping the Indians in a continuum of brotherhood, I bear another desire of
remembering the folks the vitality of preaching every djin personifying sovereignty, for it
may be perceived as the apt mode of internalised awareness against the omnicious desiresof money maker take for instance, the unsuppressedly publicising educational offshoots for
the sake of training every other student— a domain where they’ve been hoarding the
ridiculous of ridiculous commodities let include the procedures in spite inevitable failure in
teaching if not business. Another example could be the myriad insurance agencies disguising
as life saviours who provide rewardingly whopping sums of money to a gormless but
biologically unhealthy commoner affected with the whim.
The praiseworthy Rani even kept reminding me that an utter cut off with outsiders is no way
beneficiary. As they, [now] presenting forth my pseudo thesis, enable circulation, exchange
and enhancement of assets, resources and status. After a prolonged but dreamy rambling
between me and the manly being, I was told in someway or other that an expansion of
merchandise markets should be backed nationwide.
By strengthening certain associations and commissions, we can encourage more of our
alikes into learning and pioneering— to enhance the literacy count so that in lieu of calling
after companies to hire us in foreign lands, we will end up pursuing them to find place
within the territorial boundaries or, that there will come up more indigenous rivalries
against the enormous tech and tele firms.
When I happened to tell my beloved mother about a dream as magnificent as the
aforementioned, her only jumble of words enunciated was to trek my lofty spirits down.
“From utopia to corporeality, the cruse isn’t pokingly short distanced,” said she. After
settling things up with her about occurrence of the idol’s appearance as that of anyone but
the Brave as tangible as the Rani of Jhansi in a dream I had been limerent with till then, she
suddenly placed her hand onto my head as if the long lived Warrior’s reincarnation has had
been so long nourishing me indeed.
-Pawan Kumar ‘Kanak’
