My Didi
P
erchance, many of the ceremonial rituals would have had been accomplished with
auspiciousness of matrimony by now. Perchance, we’ve been excluded from the invitees.
Perchance, the last phone call had lit the ultimate blaze of agony between them two— my
Mother and the Mosi (aunt).
Mosi had been boldly eager to keep me with herself— at her home— since my
childhood. I’ve heard my Mother speaking so that at times she’d even allow me to suckle her…or
mouth me with a bottle of milk and lock me inside an almeerah; part of it could be pretentious. Of
my all the six or nine accommodations there, I’ve been beaten repugnantly nearly four times.
Because, the unbloomed stripling was a little too stubborn and sometimes unskilled. Not to mention,
she’d often express her propriety and elegance by buying me cloths, toys and what not!
I am recalling this one incident. I was in third grade when whilst a bath at the Aunt’s
lodging she was asked to hand me an underwear for I had finished watering and rewatering the
lather off my skinny continuum; nut much to her dismay she found so that all of the undies were
torn. Torn so apart so to be unable to clad what they’re meant for. Nevertheless, she simply handed
it over to me and then leaped I out of the bathroom to the kitchen— holding the plate as if the lad
had been in hunger since his mounting of the bus from the place of hailing to there.
Later in the daylight, she took me out on a rickshaw along with herself after a prolonged
exertional discourse about my pelvic drapery. The sun gleamed bright but burning. Somehow, we
made it to the shop and there I been briskly put afore the myriad but not much dissimilar looking
pieces squeaked, “These are worn by kids (as if I were not one). They have the teeming caricatures
imprinted onto them.” I piqued with irk. “No, I want those of my preference, like the very ones I
wear,” which were the mundane unichromatic panties…
Two months later from today is my cousin’s ‘Doli’; she’ll be embarking on her cruise to
another family, another heritage. As it’s been proclaimed, “The alliance has been sanctioned by her
homies only after the enlightened Guru’s nod of head.” Mosi’s daughter will be uneasy to meet with
let alone her parting away. Either I shalst remiss visiting her groom or, she’ll be bounded by as many
formalities and rituals as to prevent herself from keeping with me her sisterly threads of affection
tied taut. To spend time with Didi has been the most exultant privilege to me say, we were galloping
at confectionaries, profligately purchasing from malls, digging our noses into cinema screens etc. etc.
I still remember her convicting me for inflicting her with pain. Indeed, there was a
caterpillar crawling in the garden. We happened to leisurely disclose its presence by cautiously
preventing ourselves from stepping on the timid totem of triumph. Suddenly, the duo of us ringed
around it. She grabbed a fallen leaf, made it writhe on it and after the bug had mounted itself up
upon the tangible tree-leaf, she twisted the twig making the leaf go round. The caterpillar happened
to fall off three or four times in the series of her pleasant servings. Swarmed with superfluous
stupidity, I tried to clasp the meek miniature. After failing so many time, I unmindedly but
dogmatically squeezed the pathetic being beneath my finger. O, how gnarly was the sight of sap
green fluid out of the slayed body for the distraught Didi.
Not many days have passed since I last heard my Mama mentioning the cousin to
someone else on another phone call. Catching her crying, I redialled with vengeance and resentfully
kept on blabbering profanities to the person on the other side. Hours passed. And then, I was told
her being remorseful for anything but the lurking departure of a veiled niece.
