THE RADIO LICENCE 


I suddenly realised with a shudder that I was actually 
passing through the last moments of the grace period 
allowed for renewing a radio licence. I hurried to the 
nearest ix>st-office counter and asked for a form. The 
man at the counter hesitated just for a second—perhaps 
he had a feeling that I might be making a collection of 
forms or using them (in office language) as 'One-side- 
paper’. I discovered later that this w'as not feasible, the 
form choking with inscriptions and dotted lines on every 
side. The man at the counter looked at me steadily and 
asked if I had taken out my licence at the same post-office 
previously, if not, where ? This was a piece of cross- 
examination I could not face. Last year probably I had 
not burdened myself with a radio set, or perhaps I had 
authorised someone else to obtain a licence. I had a 
feeling that perhaps I was about to be charged with 
perjury. I gave some reply. The man at the counter gave 
me a form immediately. At the first glance I wanted to 
ask, "Why do they call it a Wireless Receiving Station ? 
Is it in order to give the whole business a high-sounding 
name or shall I really have to say hereafter I am going 
back to my Wireless Receiving Station when I mean I 
am going home T But I suppressed my question, not 
being sure that it was safe : there might be grave penalties 
attached to Contempt of' Wireless Licence Form or 
Frivolous Conduct at Post-Office Counters. I swallowed 
my question and started writing on the form. First I 
had to write down my name *In block letters* as ordained. 


1 



In trying to write in block letters I misspelt my own name 
(it always happ)ens when one has to write slowly in block 
letters, the simplest spelling is likely to elude one), I 
spoilt the form and had to ask for another with consider¬ 
able apology ; and taking it home, I wrote dowm my name 
with great care, and then Residence, Road, Locality and 
Town left me thinking. The trouble was the road I live in 
has remained nameless for centuries : our municipality 
evidently has no faith in street names. My street is one 
of the five roads running north to south, and it is known 
the world over as the road to the right of the Concrete 
Water Tank on Vani Vilas Road, but obviously this 
would be too homely on a form ; and so on the iiispira- 
tion of the moment I wrote dowm ‘First Cross Road’. I 
felt that I was christening our street now without much 
fuss, and this w^as going to stay, unless someone on the 
Fifth Cross Road also decided to call his the First Cross ; 
in which case I had no doubt that mine would be known 
as the First First Cross Road' and his the Second First 
Cross Road. Following this, there was a boxed space which 
confounded me, which required of me details as to Occu- 
pation (would they feel pleased if I said that my main 
occupation was hopefully w^aiting on my radio for good 
music ?). Mother tongue (why did they still stick to 
this old word, the current fashion being ‘regional lan¬ 
guage’?) and the number of members in the household 
(what have they to do with it?). In this last item 
should I include my cousin’s son w'ho happened to be 
staying with us at the moment, and were we to exclude the 
three junior-most,' members of the house, whose total 
years did not exceed nine ? I felt as if I were lacing a 
census enumerator. Why did they ask so many ques¬ 
tions ? I suddenly told myself, “I am, after all, an in- 


2 



significant operator ot a wireless receiving set. Who am 
I tQ say what is important and what is not in a wire¬ 
less licence form T' I bowed my head in humility and 
filled up the form. Soon came another portion which 
halted my progress: 'For working a wireless station at 
.. . {Location of the station) \ I wondered whether I 
should just be saying that the station would be located 
in the front passage of our house or did they expect me 
to say something else ? The columns following it were 
by no means easy to tackle : Serial No. of broadcast 
receiver. Manufacturer's name, type of model. Number of 
the Set, person from whom purchased, etc., caused me acute 
anxiety. It was pleasing to reflect on the undying nature 
of a radio transaction, but mine w^as a mongrel set assem¬ 
bled by a homeless crank, no two bits in it having the 
same origin. How vShould I describe it ? 

Finally I managed to deal with the form to my entire 
satisfaction for down at the lx)ttom of the page I discovered 
the wholesome advice 'Strike out the words not wanted' 
and acted on it promptly ; as a result of which only my 
name and door number remained on the form. I took it 
to the post-office, paid down fifteen rupees and went home 
with the licence in my pocket, feeling satisfied that I had 
paid the piper and could henceforth call the tune. 


3 



FROG IN THE WELL 


Everyone living within the bounds of his own 
surroundings may be viewed as a Frog in tlie Well. 
There is no need to be apologetic about it. The confines 
of the well may have their own merits : cool surroundings, 
soft moss-upholstered walls around, a brief day between 
sunrise and sunset when the sun appears over the pulley 
above, and heaven itself may mean nothing more than a 
circular blue patch above. But what is wrong in it ? 
Within his limits, the Wellsian (I use the word in the sense 
*of the weir) Frog may have his own routine of living, 
with occasional excitement when a human face peeps down 
at the rim either to draw water or throw itself down. The 
Frog has every reason to feel completely happy in his 
own world ; when he has to seek extrasocial life he may 
move on to another part of the pond and hobnob with 
fellow frogs and give himself over to community singing. 

A lifetime may thus be spent, nobody being the 
worse for it. It is I suppose, what great poets and saints 
have hankered after. “This lime-tree bower my prison/' 
says Coleridge. “Mine be a cot beside the hill," says 
another : which may mean, in effect, “Please leave me 
alone, to continue my days in my own well...." 

But it is not easily achieved. Society presses upon 
one all the time. The progress of the last half a century may 
be described as the progress of the Frog cut of his Well. 
All means of communication, all methods of speedy travel, 
all newspapers, broadcasts, and every kind of invention 
is calculated to keep up a barrage of attack on the Frog 

