in the Well. He will not be left alone. You may shut 
yourself away from all family business or gossip, but you 
cannot shut your ears to the cricket commentary coming 
over the air ; or you may dispense with your radio set, 
but your neighbour's will not leave you alone. Every 
hour of the day the air pulsates with varied reports, 
activities, advices, claims and warnings. The Frog may 
not know how to read, but that won’t save him ; the attack 
will be kept up through his ears, or he may be blissfully 
deaf, but it is probable that television will bring the market 
place or the battleground to his very hearth. With all 
this how is it ever possible for the Frog to remain in 
isolation ? 

Yet it may not be such an undesirable state. It may 
be that ultimately we shall attain our peace of mind and 
tranquillity of nerves when we are able to revert to this 
stage. What is the busy politician's going on a holiday, 
shut away from all visitors and correspondence and files, 
except an effort to imitate the Wellsian Frog ? When 
we come to think of it the average citydweller's is a perfect 
instance of Frog in the Well. The man who has been 
brought up in a particular area spends practically all his 
life there : his club, his shop, his children's school, his 
neighbours and all his associations are there, and if his 
work compels him to go out, he creeps into the same bus 
and returns by the same bus each day, and looks forward 
to Sunday as a day when he need not go out of his own 
district. He may spend a lifetime without ever knowing 
what sort of life is being lived in the other fifty-cxid 
divisions in the city. Professions also isolate people and 
keep them in watertight compartments. The professor of 
English confines his contacts strictly to those in his 
department, the lawyer’s world is his chamber and the bar 


5 



association, the doctor's his clinic and the medical 
association, and in each place the joy, humour and 
philosophy of life is just what one can share with one's 
colleagues. I should like to know how many hours in 
a week a man of one profession, say an auditor, spends 
watching or listening to the problems of a mechanic in a 
workshop. Yet that is the only way in which one may 
escai>e the Frog state. One must also learn to take an 
interest in other pyeople’s affairs : the undischarged debts 
of a neighbour or the partition deeds of two quarrelling 
brothers, or the 'in-law' misdeeds in some other house 
must be viewed with the intensity of a personal problem. 
This tendency in some measure, perhaps only for its 
gossip value, is evident in villages and small-town societies 
rather than in big cities. If the Frog in the Well state 
is to be successfully abolished it will be necessary to induce 
people to cultivate a lot of prying interest in other people's 
affairs, openly, everywhere. 


6 



HIGHER MATHEMATICS 


There recently appeared a news item that a profouna 
mathematical discovery has been made, a solution to a 
problem that has been bothering the minds of mathe¬ 
maticians for half a century, something tliat will build a 
‘mathematical bridge’ between the forces within the 
universe as a whole and the forces within the nuclei of 
the atoms. Any news that mentions the atom becomes 
suspect these days, I only hope this does not mean that 
belligerent folk are going to be in possession of a new 
weapon ; a combination of figures and symbols with which 
to paralyse the thinking powers of an enemy nation. 
Apart from this, 1 view' the news without emotion. This 
mathematical discovery may thrill some people, but it 
leaves me cold. Mathematics is a matter of constitution. 
It is like music. Some people are tone deaf and often 
wonder how any adult could go on sitting in a hall for 
three or four hours, tolerating the noise and gesticulations 
of a singer. In the vsame w^ay I am, if I may coin an 
expression, “figure-blind.” My mind refuses to work when 
it encounters numbers. Everything that has anything to 
do with figures is higher mathematics to me. There is only 
one sort of mathematics in my view and that is the higher 
one. To mislead young minds by classihing arithmetic 
as elementary mathematics has always seemed to me a 
base trick. A thing does not become elementary by being 
called so. “A rose by any other name would smell as 
sweet.” However elementary we may pretend arithmetic 
to be, it ever remains puzzling, fatiguing and incalculable. 


7 



There was a fashion in the elementary school in which I 
read to prescribe a book in which the sums were all about 
English life. The characters in the problems were all 
John and Joan and Albert, and the calculations pertained 
to apples and the fares of hansomcabs. In those days we 
saw apples only in coloured picture books and we never 
understood what hansomcabs meant. We were used to 
dealing in mangoes and jutkas and bullockcarts, and the 
payments were not in farthing or pence, but in rupees, 
annas and pies. While wrestling with the problems in 
this book I was always racked with the thought that 
perhaps I could solve the sums if they dealt with Indian 
life. Fortunately in answer to this prayer we soon had 
sums dealing with the interminable transactions of Rama 
and Krishna. But I soon found that this did not make 
things easier for me. The problems remained as tough as 
ever, and my wit and calculations remainal defeated. My 
constant preoccupation was with the last section of the 
textbook where one found the answers to the problems. 
Every time I did a sum I turned to the last section with 
trembling and prayer, but I always found there a different 
figure from what I had arrived at laboriously. The 
disappointment reduced me to tears. A sense of hopeless 
frustration seized me each time I referred to the answer in 
the printed book. I sometimes wished I had been born 
in another world where there could be no mathematics. 
The whole subject seemed to be devised to defeat and 
keep me in a perpetual anguish of trial and error. I 
remember particularly that the sections which made 
absolutely no sense to me were called “ Practice.” The 
teacher decreed, “Find out by Practice” etc., and the 
intelligent boys of the class at once drew three vertical 
lines and did something or other with them. I never 


8 



understood what they did with those and why it was called 
“ Practice.” To this day I have no idea; what it is all 
about. I also remained oblivious to the intricacies of 
stocks and shares and discount; thcvse I viewed as the worst 
snares ever laid for a human being. I had a fear at one 
time that I might have to spend the rest of my life in a 
high school, arithmetic acting as a barrier to my exit ; 
but in every young heart at this stage there arises a hope 
of redemption, through algebra and geometry. It might 
only be a delusion to think that drawing a circle within 
a triangle (or is it the other way) could be easier than 
calculating 3.1/4 and 7.7/8 of something or other, or that 
the anonymous hooded figures of algebra were easier to 
tackle than quantities of mangoes and percentages. Any¬ 
way, one got out of high school with a feeling of escaping 
from a concentration camp, the greatest virtue of 
university education seeming to be that unless one chose 
one need not go near mathematics. 

I don’t think years have improved my outlook or 
equipment in regard to mathematics, although as a grow'ii- 
up I am not supposed to give out my real feelings in the 
matter. I have to keep up appearances before youngsters. 
So that the other day when I found my nephew (who has 
evidently imbibed my tradition in mathematics) literally 
in tears, sitting at his desk and chasing an elusive sum, I 
told him patronisingly, “Well, there is no use shedding tears 
over mathematics. If you read the sum correctly and 
think it over calmly, I am sure you will get the answer. 
The thing is you must not be in a hurry. You must be very 
calm, I tell you. At y'our age, do you know' how we were 
managing it ?’’ And I told him what I fully knew to be 
a cock-and-bull story about my prowess and industry in 
this subject. He adeed, “Won’t you help, me do this sum?’’
