9 



I looked at it critically. It was something about profit 
and loss. As I gazed at the sum, the answer suddenly 
flashed on my mind. I casually turned to the last page 
to see if my answer was correct. It wasn’t. I gently 
put down the book, telling the boy, “Weil, of course. I 
can do this sum but, you know, my ‘working’ will be 
different : it won’t be much use to you. You must do it 
in the way it has been taught in your school; moreover, 
you must learn to depend upon your own effort. Other¬ 
wise you will not learn.’’ I hastily moved out of the pale 
of mathematics. 


10 



GOVERNMENT MUSIC 


When music comes to be nationalised the director- 
general of music will say in his administration report : 
‘During the period under review two thousand hours of 
vocal and sixteen hundred hours of instrumental music 

were provided for a total audience of 1,25,000_’ 

The nation’s musical policy will, needless to say, bear 
the colour and stamp of the minister holding the portfolio. 
He may decree that a Fifty-five Year Plan for the musical 
revival and integration of the country through music 
should be taken up immediately. In order to facilitate 
the integration of north and south, it will be suggested that 
a south Indian audience should sit through a performcmce 
of north Indian music for a minimum of twelve hours 
each quarter, and vice versa. And the audience must shmv 
no boredom or weariness. Any sign of restlessness will 
be viewed as an unnational activity. Yawning at such a 
function will be punishable with both fine and reprimand. 
Looking about for ap exit will be interpreted as a lack 
of interest in the performance; the burden of proving 
otherwise will be on the man so charged. In every music 
sabha there will be a government-appointed watch-and- 
ward inspector with a staff commensurate with the strength 
of the sabha. His business will be to keep an eye on 
the audience and see that people do not nod. If he sees 
someone nodding during a performance, he will be quite 
entitled to switch off the microphone of the singer and 
switch on his own microphone, which he will always keep 
cleverly concealed on his person, and cry, preferably in 


11 



a musical manner, “Wake up, citizens, this is not the time 
to sleep.” His impressions in the matter shall be final 
during the recital. Disputes, if any, shall be referred to 
the Music Tribunal, which will meet once in three months 
at Calcutta, Bombay and Madras, and which shall have 
jurisdiction over all matters pertaining to music. Any 
member of the tribunal shall be entitled to enter any music 
sabka and stop the performance at whatever stage, without 
assigning any reason for his action, but it is understood 
this is purely a technical provision, to be used only in an 
emergency. 

Musicians shall be recognised as the torchbearers of 
culture. For this purpose once every three j'ears there 
shall be elected the grand musician of the Indian Republic, 
who shall be given a scroll with this honour inscribed 
thereon. He shall be entitled to one-and-a-half first class 
one way or air fare, whichever may be less, from his town 
of birth to the capital. He shall be assigned a definite 
precedence in all official banquets—^his degree shall not 
be less than that of the chief conservator of forests and 
between the directors-general of fisheries and synthetic 
rice. He shall be given a basic salary and an absorbable 
allowance not exceeding one half of the maximum grade 
of the curator of a museum. He shall be entitled to a 
pre-audited allowance for throat pastilles, coffee, pan or 
such mood-inducing articles. It must be recognised that 
musicians and all artistes are men of moods. Every effort 
must be made to accord recognition to this fact. However, 
music being a nationalised activity, coming within the 
Fifty-five Year Plan, and the government being anxious 
not to lose valuable time, musicians will be well-advised 
to retain their good moods, as far as possible. The words 
"as far as possible’ are used advisedly, just to indicate that 


12 



every effort will be made to treat a musician’s moods with 
tolerance and imderstanding. In this the musician shall 
also accord the maximum cooperation possible, in the 
following manner : whenever he is likely to get into an 
undesirable mood which is apt to mar a performance, the 
musician shall send an advance notice of it to the director 
of meteorology, who shall incorporate it in his daily 
weather report. When it is done the artiste shall be deemed 
to be on leave with average pay. Such a period shall 
not be counted against his total leave unless it is extended 
beyond ten days, which will not be sanctioned unless 
accompanied by a life certificate. 

The government has no reason to doubt that it is 
moving on the right lines. Composers are particularly 
requested to remember that, while the government 
recognise the fact that every freedom should be given to 
artistes and no restriction should be placed on them in any 
manner since Art will flourish only in an atmosphere of 
the greatest freedom, we are now living in a secular state 
and the Fifty-five Year Plan holds top priority. It is 
desirable that composers, in addition to their usual 
preoccupation with love, devotion, etc., compose songs that 
will give our villagers (remember that the real India is 
in its 500,(KX) villages) an incentive to try the Japanese 
method of rice cultivation, conserve topsoil, and mend 
their own roads and drains without waiting for govern¬ 
ment help. We have no doubt that the future of our 
country, as well as world peace, depends upon the revival 
of our music, which can be achieved only through the 
successful working of our Fifty-five Year Plan. 


13 



FIFTEEN YEARS 


Language has become a profoundly embarrassing 
subject nowadays. The thought of it gives a peace-loving 
citizen a pain in the neck. I mean it with particular 
reference to the English language. An average citizen 
today is in the position of appreciating the language but 
not wanting it. We are not so far away from the time 
when people used to say as a matter of prestige, '‘He 
speaks perfect English,’' and a bride who could write her 
letters in English and who could claim to have read Scott 
and Dickens was considered fully accomplished. In the 
matter of employment, too, a young man who could draft 
an English letter with ease and confidence storxl a better 
chance of being employed than the one who was proficient 
only in the regional language. And there were people who 
didn’t know English, and who said with a sigh, “If I had 
only learned English I would have conquered the world- 
This may not be a very comfortable memory for anyone 
now, but it would be false to pretend that such values did 
not exist at one time. However various causes, practical, 
political, etc., have demanded the abolition of English 
from our midst. It is almost a matter of national propriety 
and prestige now to declare one’s aversion to this language, 
and to cry for its abolition. 

But the language has a sirenlike charm and a lot of 
persistence, and (if we may personify it) comes up again 
and again and demands, “What have I done that you 
hate me so much ?’’ The judge does not lift up his head 
for fear that he might weaken. He assumes the gruffest 


14 



tone possible and says, “You are the language of our 
oppressors. It is through you that our nation was enslaved, 
and it is only through you that the people were divided, 
so that those who were masters of English could rule 
others who didn’t know the language. Your insidious 
influence wrought a cleavage in our own midst—’’ 

“You speak very good English.’’ 

“Well, well, I won’t be flattered by it,’’ says the judge. 
“All of us are masters of English, but that proves nothing. 
You are the language of those who were our political 
oppressors. We don’t want you any more in our midst. 
Please, begone.” 

“Where shall I go?” 

“To your own country—” 

“I am afraid this is my country. I fear I will stay 
here, whatever may be the rank and status you may assign 
me- as the first language or the second language or the 
thousandth. You may banish me from the classrooms, 
but I can always find other places where I can stay. I 
love this country where : 

‘Full many a glorious morning have I seen 

Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye. 

Kissing with golden face the meadows green. 

Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy.’ 

“That is a beautiful Shakespeare passage. However, 
I cannot allow' the court’s time to be wasted in this manner. 
You have a knack of beguiling the mind with quotations. 
I forbid you to quote anything from English literature.” 

“Why are you dead set against me, sir ? I have a 
fundamental right to know why you are throwing me 
out, under the Indian Constitution. ...” 

“But it doesn’t apply to you.”
