celebrating Bonfire Night early – it’s not until next week, folks!
But I can promise a wet night tonight.’
Mr Dursley sat frozen in his armchair. Shooting stars all over
Britain? Owls flying by daylight? Mysterious people in cloaks all
over the place? And a whisper, a whisper about the Potters …
Mrs Dursley came into the living-room carrying two cups of
tea. It was no good. He’d have to say something to her. He cleared
his throat nervously. ‘Er – Petunia, dear – you haven’t heard from
your sister lately, have you?’
As he had expected, Mrs Dursley looked shocked and angry.
After all, they normally pretended she didn’t have a sister.
‘No,’ she said sharply. ‘Why?’
‘Funny stuff on the news,’ Mr Dursley mumbled. ‘Owls …
shooting stars … and there were a lot of funny-looking people in
town today …’
‘So?’ snapped Mrs Dursley.
‘Well, I just thought … maybe … it was something to do with …
you know … her lot.’
Mrs Dursley sipped her tea through pursed lips. Mr Dursley
wondered whether he dared tell her he’d heard the name ‘Potter’.
He decided he didn’t dare. Instead he said, as casually as he could,
‘Their son – he’d be about Dudley’s age now, wouldn’t he?’
‘I suppose so,’ said Mrs Dursley stiffly.
‘What’s his name again? Howard, isn’t it?’
‘Harry. Nasty, common name, if you ask me.’
‘Oh, yes,’ said Mr Dursley, his heart sinking horribly. ‘Yes, I
quite agree.’
He didn’t say another word on the subject as they went upstairs
to bed. While Mrs Dursley was in the bathroom, Mr Dursley crept
to the bedroom window and peered down into the front garden.
The cat was still there. It was staring down Privet Drive as though
it was waiting for something.
Was he imagining things? Could all this have anything to do
with the Potters? If it did … if it got out that they were related to a
pair of – well, he didn’t think he could bear it.
The Dursleys got into bed. Mrs Dursley fell asleep quickly but
Mr Dursley lay awake, turning it all over in his mind. His last,
comforting thought before he fell asleep was that even if the
Potters were involved, there was no reason for them to come near
him and Mrs Dursley. The Potters knew very well what he and 
12 Harry Potter
Petunia thought about them and their kind … He couldn’t see how
he and Petunia could get mixed up in anything that might be
going on. He yawned and turned over. It couldn’t affect them …
How very wrong he was.
Mr Dursley might have been drifting into an uneasy sleep, but
the cat on the wall outside was showing no sign of sleepiness. It
was sitting as still as a statue, its eyes fixed unblinkingly on the
far corner of Privet Drive. It didn’t so much as quiver when a car
door slammed in the next street, nor when two owls swooped
overhead. In fact, it was nearly midnight before the cat moved at all.
A man appeared on the corner the cat had been watching,
appeared so suddenly and silently you’d have thought he’d just
popped out of the ground. The cat’s tail twitched and its eyes
narrowed.
Nothing like this man had ever been seen in Privet Drive. He
was tall, thin and very old, judging by the silver of his hair and
beard, which were both long enough to tuck into his belt. He was
wearing long robes, a purple cloak which swept the ground and
high-heeled, buckled boots. His blue eyes were light, bright and
sparkling behind half-moon spectacles and his nose was very long
and crooked, as though it had been broken at least twice. This
man’s name was Albus Dumbledore.
Albus Dumbledore didn’t seem to realise that he had just
arrived in a street where everything from his name to his boots
was unwelcome. He was busy rummaging in his cloak, looking for
something. But he did seem to realise he was being watched,
because he looked up suddenly at the cat, which was still staring
at him from the other end of the street. For some reason, the sight
of the cat seemed to amuse him. He chuckled and muttered, ‘I
should have known.’
He had found what he was looking for in his inside pocket. It
seemed to be a silver cigarette lighter. He flicked it open, held it
up in the air and clicked it. The nearest street lamp went out with
a little pop. He clicked it again – the next lamp flickered into
darkness. Twelve times he clicked the Put-Outer, until the only
lights left in the whole street were two tiny pinpricks in the distance, which were the eyes of the cat watching him. If anyone
looked out of their window now, even beady-eyed Mrs Dursley,
they wouldn’t be able to see anything that was happening down
on the pavement. Dumbledore slipped the Put-Outer back inside 
The Boy Who Lived 13
his cloak and set off down the street towards number four, where
he sat down on the wall next to the cat. He didn’t look at it, but
after a moment he spoke to it.
‘Fancy seeing you here, Professor McGonagall.’
He turned to smile at the tabby, but it had gone. Instead he was
smiling at a rather severe-looking woman who was wearing square
glasses exactly the shape of the markings the cat had had around
its eyes. She, too, was wearing a cloak, an emerald one. Her black
hair was drawn into a tight bun. She looked distinctly ruffled.
‘How did you know it was me?’ she asked.
‘My dear Professor, I’ve never seen a cat sit so stiffly.’
‘You’d be stiff if you’d been sitting on a brick wall all day,’ said
Professor McGonagall.
‘All day? When you could have been celebrating? I must have
passed a dozen feasts and parties on my way here.’
Professor McGonagall sniffed angrily.
‘Oh yes, everyone’s celebrating, all right,’ she said impatiently.
‘You’d think they’d be a bit more careful, but no – even the
Muggles have noticed something’s going on. It was on their news.’
She jerked her head back at the Dursleys’ dark living-room
window. ‘I heard it. Flocks of owls … shooting stars … Well,
they’re not completely stupid. They were bound to notice
something. Shooting stars down in Kent – I’ll bet that was Dedalus
Diggle. He never had much sense.’
‘You can’t blame them,’ said Dumbledore gently. ‘We’ve had
precious little to celebrate for eleven years.’
‘I know that,’ said Professor McGonagall irritably. ‘But that’s no
reason to lose our heads. People are being downright careless, out
on the streets in broad daylight, not even dressed in Muggle
clothes, swapping rumours.’
She threw a sharp, sideways glance at Dumbledore here, as
though hoping he was going to tell her something, but he didn’t,
so she went on: ‘A fine thing it would be if, on the very day YouKnow-Who seems to have disappeared at last, the Muggles found
out about us all. I suppose he really has gone, Dumbledore?’
‘It certainly seems so,’ said Dumbledore. ‘We have much to be
thankful for. Would you care for a sherbet lemon?’
‘A what?’
‘A sherbet lemon. They’re a kind of Muggle sweet I’m rather
fond of.’ 
14 Harry Potter
‘No, thank you,’ said Professor McGonagall coldly, as though
she didn’t think this was the moment for sherbet lemons. ‘As I say,
even if You-Know-Who has gone –’
‘My dear Professor, surely a sensible person like yourself can
call him by his name? All this “You-Know-Who” nonsense – for
eleven years I have been trying to persuade people to call him by
his proper name: Voldemort.’ Professor McGonagall flinched, but
Dumbledore, who was unsticking two sherbet lemons, seemed
not to notice. ‘It all gets so confusing if we keep saying “YouKnow-Who”.’ I have never seen any reason to be frightened of
saying Voldemort’s name.’
‘I know you haven’t,’ said Professor McGonagall, sounding halfexasperated, half-admiring. ‘But you’re different. Everyone knows
you’re the only one You-Know – oh, all right, Voldemort – was
frightened of.’
‘You flatter me,’ said Dumbledore calmly. ‘Voldemort had
powers I will never have.’
‘Only because you’re too – well – noble to use them.’
‘It’s lucky it’s dark. I haven’t blushed so much since Madam
Pomfrey told me she liked my new earmuffs.’
Professor McGonagall shot a sharp look at Dumbledore and
said, ‘The owls are nothing to the rumours that are flying around.
You know what everyone’s saying? About why he’s disappeared?
About what finally stopped him?’
It seemed that Professor McGonagall had reached the point she
was most anxious to discuss, the real reason she had been waiting
on a cold hard wall all day, for neither as a cat nor as a woman
had she fixed Dumbledore with such a piercing stare as she did
now. It was plain that whatever ‘everyone’ was saying, she was not
going to believe it until Dumbledore told her it was true.
Dumbledore, however, was choosing another sherbet lemon and
did not answer.
‘What they’re saying,’ she pressed on, ‘is that last night Voldemort
turned up in Godric’s Hollow. He went to find the Potters. The
rumour is that Lily and James Potter are – are – that they’re –
dead.’
Dumbledore bowed his head. Professor McGonagall gasped.
‘Lily and James … I can’t believe it … I didn’t want to believe it
… Oh, Albus …’
Dumbledore reached out and patted her on the shoulder. 
