know … I know …’ he said heavily.
Professor McGonagall’s voice trembled as she went on. ‘That’s
not all. They’re saying he tried to kill the Potters’ son, Harry. But –
he couldn’t. He couldn’t kill that little boy. No one knows why, or
how, but they’re saying that when he couldn’t kill Harry Potter,
Voldemort’s power somehow broke – and that’s why he’s gone.’
Dumbledore nodded glumly.
‘It’s – it’s true?’ faltered Professor McGonagall. ‘After all he’s
done … all the people he’s killed … he couldn’t kill a little boy? It’s
just astounding … of all the things to stop him … but how in the
name of heaven did Harry survive?’
‘We can only guess,’ said Dumbledore. ‘We may never know.’
Professor McGonagall pulled out a lace handkerchief and
dabbed at her eyes beneath her spectacles. Dumbledore gave a
great sniff as he took a golden watch from his pocket and examined
it. It was a very odd watch. It had twelve hands but no numbers;
instead, little planets were moving around the edge. It must have
made sense to Dumbledore, though, because he put it back in his
pocket and said, ‘Hagrid’s late. I suppose it was he who told you
I’d be here, by the way?’
‘Yes,’ said Professor McGonagall. ‘And I don’t suppose you’re
going to tell me why you’re here, of all places?’
‘I’ve come to bring Harry to his aunt and uncle. They’re the
only family he has left now.’
‘You don’t mean – you can’t mean the people who live here?’
cried Professor McGonagall, jumping to her feet and pointing at
number four. ‘Dumbledore – you can’t. I’ve been watching them
all day. You couldn’t find two people who are less like us. And
they’ve got this son – I saw him kicking his mother all the way up
the street, screaming for sweets. Harry Potter come and live here!’
‘It’s the best place for him,’ said Dumbledore firmly. ‘His aunt
and uncle will be able to explain everything to him when he’s
older. I’ve written them a letter.’
‘A letter?’ repeated Professor McGonagall faintly, sitting back
down on the wall. ‘Really, Dumbledore, you think you can explain
all this in a letter? These people will never understand him! He’ll
be famous – a legend – I wouldn’t be surprised if today was
known as Harry Potter Day in future – there will be books written
about Harry – every child in our world will know his name!’
‘Exactly,’ said Dumbledore, looking very seriously over the top 
16 Harry Potter
of his half-moon glasses. ‘It would be enough to turn any boy’s
head. Famous before he can walk and talk! Famous for something
he won’t even remember! Can’t you see how much better off he’ll
be, growing up away from all that until he’s ready to take it?’
Professor McGonagall opened her mouth, changed her mind,
swallowed and then said, ‘Yes – yes, you’re right, of course. But
how is the boy getting here, Dumbledore?’ She eyed his cloak
suddenly as though she thought he might be hiding Harry
underneath it.
‘Hagrid’s bringing him.’
‘You think it – wise – to trust Hagrid with something as important as this?’
‘I would trust Hagrid with my life,’ said Dumbledore.
‘I’m not saying his heart isn’t in the right place,’ said Professor
McGonagall grudgingly, ‘but you can’t pretend he’s not careless.
He does tend to – what was that?’
A low rumbling sound had broken the silence around them. It
grew steadily louder as they looked up and down the street for
some sign of a headlight; it swelled to a roar as they both looked
up at the sky – and a huge motorbike fell out of the air and landed
on the road in front of them.
If the motorbike was huge, it was nothing to the man sitting
astride it. He was almost twice as tall as a normal man and at least
five times as wide. He looked simply too big to be allowed, and so
wild – long tangles of bushy black hair and beard hid most of his
face, he had hands the size of dustbin lids and his feet in their
leather boots were like baby dolphins. In his vast, muscular arms
he was holding a bundle of blankets.
‘Hagrid,’ said Dumbledore, sounding relieved. ‘At last. And
where did you get that motorbike?’
‘Borrowed it, Professor Dumbledore, sir,’ said the giant, climbing
carefully off the motorbike as he spoke. ‘Young Sirius Black lent it
me. I’ve got him, sir.’
‘No problems, were there?’
‘No, sir – house was almost destroyed but I got him out all
right before the Muggles started swarmin’ around. He fell asleep
as we was flyin’ over Bristol.’
Dumbledore and Professor McGonagall bent forward over the
bundle of blankets. Inside, just visible, was a baby boy, fast asleep.
Under a tuft of jet-black hair over his forehead they could see a 
The Boy Who Lived 17
curiously shaped cut, like a bolt of lightning.
‘Is that where –?’ whispered Professor McGonagall.
‘Yes,’ said Dumbledore. ‘He’ll have that scar for ever.’
‘Couldn’t you do something about it, Dumbledore?’
‘Even if I could, I wouldn’t. Scars can come in useful. I have
one myself above my left knee which is a perfect map of the
London Underground. Well – give him here, Hagrid – we’d better
get this over with.’
Dumbledore took Harry in his arms and turned towards the
Dursleys’ house.
‘Could I – could I say goodbye to him, sir?’ asked Hagrid.
He bent his great, shaggy head over Harry and gave him what
must have been a very scratchy, whiskery kiss. Then, suddenly,
Hagrid let out a howl like a wounded dog.
‘Shhh!’ hissed Professor McGonagall. ‘You’ll wake the Muggles!’
‘S-s-sorry,’ sobbed Hagrid, taking out a large spotted handkerchief and burying his face in it. ‘But I c-c-can’t stand it – Lily an’
James dead – an’ poor little Harry off ter live with Muggles –’
‘Yes, yes, it’s all very sad, but get a grip on yourself, Hagrid, or
we’ll be found,’ Professor McGonagall whispered, patting Hagrid
gingerly on the arm as Dumbledore stepped over the low garden
wall and walked to the front door. He laid Harry gently on the
doorstep, took a letter out of his cloak, tucked it inside Harry’s
blankets and then came back to the other two. For a full minute
the three of them stood and looked at the little bundle; Hagrid’s
shoulders shook, Professor McGonagall blinked furiously and the
twinkling light that usually shone from Dumbledore’s eyes seemed
to have gone out.
‘Well,’ said Dumbledore finally, ‘that’s that. We’ve no business
staying here. We may as well go and join the celebrations.’
‘Yeah,’ said Hagrid in a very muffled voice. ‘I’d best get
this bike away. G’night, Professor McGonagall – Professor
Dumbledore, sir.’
Wiping his streaming eyes on his jacket sleeve, Hagrid swung
himself on to the motorbike and kicked the engine into life; with
a roar it rose into the air and off into the night.
‘I shall see you soon, I expect, Professor McGonagall,’ said
Dumbledore, nodding to her. Professor McGonagall blew her nose
in reply.
Dumbledore turned and walked back down the street. On the 
18 Harry Potter
corner he stopped and took out the silver Put-Outer. He clicked it
once and twelve balls of light sped back to their street lamps so
that Privet Drive glowed suddenly orange and he could make out
a tabby cat slinking around the corner at the other end of the
street. He could just see the bundle of blankets on the step of
number four.
‘Good luck, Harry,’ he murmured. He turned on his heel and
with a swish of his cloak he was gone.
A breeze ruffled the neat hedges of Privet Drive, which lay
silent and tidy under the inky sky, the very last place you would
expect astonishing things to happen. Harry Potter rolled over
inside his blankets without waking up. One small hand closed on
the letter beside him and he slept on, not knowing he was special,
not knowing he was famous, not knowing he would be woken in
a few hours’ time by Mrs Dursley’s scream as she opened the front
door to put out the milk bottles, nor that he would spend the next
few weeks being prodded and pinched by his cousin Dudley … He
couldn’t know that at this very moment, people meeting in secret
all over the country were holding up their glasses and saying in
hushed voices: ' To Harry Potter – the boy who lived!’ 
