A teacher was what she had always wanted to be, what she was
qualified to be. During the years she was married and living with our
father, who had a job as an assistant manager on a remote tea estate
in Assam, the dream of pursuing a career of any kind atrophied and
fell away. It was rekindled (as nightmare more than dream) when
she realized that her husband, like many young men who worked
on lonely tea estates, was hopelessly addicted to alcohol.
When war broke out between India and China in October
1962, women and children were evacuated from border states.
We moved to Calcutta. Once we got there, my mother decided
that she would not return to Assam. From Calcutta we travelled
across the country, all the way south to Ootacamund
​­
– ​­Ooty – ​a
small hill station in the state of Tamil Nadu. My brother, ​­LKC – ​
Lalith Kumar Christopher ​­Roy – ​was four and a half years old,
and I was a month away from my third birthday. We did not see
or hear from our father again until we were in our twenties.


In Ooty we lived in ​­one-​­half of a ‘holiday’ cottage that
belonged to our maternal grandfather who had retired as a senior
government ​­servant – ​an Imperial ​­Entomologist – ​with the British
government in Delhi. He and my grandmother were estranged.
He had severed links with her and his children years ago. He died
the year I was born.
I don’t know how we got into that cottage. Maybe the tenant
who lived in the other half had a key. Maybe we broke in. My
mother seemed familiar with the house. And the town. Perhaps
she had been there as a child, with her parents. The cottage was
dank and gloomy with cold, cracked cement floors and an asbes-
tos ceiling. A plywood partition separated our half from rooms
that were occupied by the tenant. She was an old English lady
called Mrs Patmore. She wore her hair in a high, puffy style, which
made us wonder what was hidden inside it. Wasps, we thought,
my brother and I. At night she had bad dreams and would scream
and moan. I’m not sure if she paid any rent. She might not have
known who to pay it to. We, certainly, paid no rent. We were
squatters, ​­interlopers – ​not tenants. We lived like fugitives amid
huge wooden trunks packed full of the dead Imperial Entomolo-
gist’s opulent ​­clothes – ​silk ties, ​­dress-​­shirts, ​­three-​­piece suits.
We found an old biscuit tin full of cufflinks. (Obviously he was an
enthusiastic collaborator with the colonial government and took
the Imperial part of his professional designation seriously.) Later,
when my brother and I were old enough to understand, we would
be told the legendary family stories about him; about his vanity
(he had a portrait of himself taken in a Hollywood photo studio)

and his violence (he whipped his children, turned them out of the
house regularly, and split my grandmother’s scalp open with a
brass vase). It was to get away from him, our mother told us, that
she married the first man who proposed to her.
Quite soon after we arrived, she got a teaching job at a
local school called Breeks. Ooty was, at the time, swarming
with schools, some of them run by British missionaries who had
chosen to stay on in India after Independence. She became friends
with a group of them who taught at an all-​­
​­ white school called
Lushington, which catered to the children of British missionaries
working in India. She managed to persuade them to let her sit in
on their classes when she had time off from her job. She hungrily
absorbed their innovative teaching methods for primary school-
children (flashcards for reading and phonetics, coloured wooden
Cuisenaire rods for maths) while being simultaneously disturbed
by their kindly, well-​­
​­
meaning racism towards Indians and India.
When she was away at work she left us for a few hours with a
sullen woman and occasionally with neighbours.
A few months into our fugitive life, my grandmother (the
Entomologist’s widow) and her oldest son
​­ – ​my mother’s older
brother, G. Isaac – ​arrived from Kerala to evict us. I hadn’t seen
either of them before. They told my mother that under the Tra-
vancore Christian Succession Act, daughters had no right to their
father’s property and that we were to leave the house immediately.
It didn’t seem to matter to them that we had nowhere to go. My
grandmother didn’t say much, but she scared me. She had conical
corneas and wore opaque sunglasses. I remember my mother, my brother and me holding hands, running through the town in panic,
trying to find a lawyer. In my memory it was night, and the streets
were dark. But it couldn’t have been. Because we did manage to
find a lawyer, who told us that the Travancore Act applied only
in the state of Kerala, not Tamil Nadu, and that even squatters
had rights. He said that if anyone tried to evict us, we could call
the police. We returned to the cottage shaking but triumphant. My
brother and I were too young to understand what the adults were
saying. But we more than understood the emotions at play: intimi-
dation, fear, anger, panic, reassurance, relief, triumph.
Our uncle G. Isaac could not have known then that by trying
to evict his younger sister from their father’s cottage, he was
laying the ground for his own downfall. It would be years before
my mother had the means and the standing to challenge the Tra-
vancore Christian Succession Act and demand an equal share of
her father’s property in Kerala. Until then, she would shield and
safeguard this memory of her mortification as though it were a
precious family heirloom, which, in a way, it was.
•
After our legal coup we expanded into the cottage, made ourselves
some space. My mother gave away the Imperial Entomologist’s
suits and cufflinks to taxi drivers at the taxi stand near the market,
and for a while Ooty had the b​­ est-​­dressed taxi drivers in the world.
Despite our hard-​­
​­
won but still tentative sense of security,
things didn’t go our way. The cold, wet climate in Ooty aggravated
my mother’s asthma. She would lie under a thick ​­metallic-​­pink
