quilt on a high iron cot, breathing great, heaving breaths, bedrid-
den for days on end. We thought she was going to die. She didn’t
like us standing around staring at her and would order us out of
her room. So, my brother and I would go off to find something else
to stare at. Mostly, we swung on the low, rickety gate at the corner
of the triangular compound, watching newlywed couples on their
honeymoon holding hands and walking past our home on their
way to romance each other in Ooty’s famous botanical gardens.
Sometimes they stopped and talked to us. They gave us sweets and
peanuts. A man gave us a catapult. We spent days perfecting our
aim. We made friends with strangers. Once one of them grabbed
my hand and marched me back into the house. He told my mother
sternly that her daughter had chickenpox. He made me show her
the blister on my stomach, which I had been showing off to any-
body who cared to examine it. My mother was furious. After he
left, she smacked me hard on my cheek and told me I was never to
lift my dress and show my stomach to strangers. Especially men.
It could have been her illness, or the medication, but she
became extremely b​­ ad-​­tempered and began to hit us often. When
she did this my brother would run away and only come home
after dark. He was a quiet boy. He never cried. When he was
upset, he would put his head down on the dining table and pre-
tend to be asleep. When he was happy, which wasn’t often, he
would dance around me boxing the air, saying he was Cassius
Clay. I don’t know how he knew who Cassius Clay was; I didn’t.
Maybe our father told him.
I think those years in Ooty were harder for him than for me because he remembered things. He remembered a better life. He
remembered our father and the big house we had lived in on the
tea estate. He remembered being loved. Fortunately, I didn’t.
My brother started school before me. He went to Lushing-
ton, the white people’s school, for a few months. (It must have
been a favour to my mother from the missionaries.) But when he
began to call local children like ourselves ‘those Indian children’
she pulled him out and enrolled him in Breeks, the school that she
taught in. When I turned five, she put me into a nursery school
(for Indian children) that was run by a frightening-​­
​­
looking Aus-
tralian missionary called Miss Mitten. She was a cruel woman
with freckles on her arms. She had a slit for a mouth. No lips. She
made it clear that she didn’t like me. Our classroom was a shed on
the edge of a patchy meadow where a few thin cows with prom-
inent hip bones grazed.
On days when her asthma was really bad, my mother would
write out a shopping list of vegetables and provisions, put it into a
basket and send us into town with it. Ooty was a safe, small town
then, with little traffic. The policemen knew us. The shopkeepers
were always kind and sometimes even gave us credit. The kindest
of them all was a lady called Kurussammal, who worked in the
Knitting Shop. She knitted two polo-​­
​­
neck sweaters for us. Bottle
green for my brother. Plum for me.
When my mother became completely bedridden for a few
weeks, Kurussammal moved in with us. Our edgy lifestyle came
to an end. It was Kurussammal who taught us what love was.
What dependability was. What being hugged was. She would cook for us and bathe us outdoors in the bitter Ooty cold with
water she boiled in a huge pot on a wood fire. To this day my
brother and I need to be almost boiled to feel properly bathed.
Before she bathed us, she combed the lice out of our hair and
showed us how to kill them. I loved killing them. They made a
satisfying sound when I squashed them with my thumbnail. Apart
from being a lightning-​­
​­
quick knitter, Kurussammal was a superb
cook. She specialized in producing food from almost no ingre-
dients. Even boiled rice with salt and a fresh green chilly tasted
good when she put it on our plates.
Kurussammal’s name meant ‘mother of the cross’ in Tamil.
Her husband, who visited us often, was Yesuratnam (‘Jesus jewel’,
‘jewel of jewels’). He had a goitre on his neck that he hid with his
woollen muffler. He, like us, always smelled of woodsmoke.
Eventually my mother grew too sick to hold down her job.
Even the massive dose of steroids she was on didn’t help. We
ran out of money. My brother and I grew undernourished and
developed primary tuberculosis.
After a few more grim months of fighting on all fronts, my
mother gave up. She decided to swallow her pride and return to
Kerala, to Ayemenem, our grandmother’s village. By then the
heat of her quarrel with her mother and brother had cooled. Even
if it hadn’t, she was out of options.
I was heartbroken about leaving Kurussammal. But I would
meet her again a few years later, when she moved to Kerala to
live with us.
