As our train crossed the border from Tamil Nadu into Kerala, the
land turned from brown to green. Everything, including the elec-
tric poles, was smothered with plants and creepers. Everything
glistened. Almost all the people who slid past the train window,
both men and women, wore white and carried black umbrellas.
My heart sang.
And then sank.
We arrived in Ayemenem uninvited and manifestly unwel-
come. The house whose doorstep we appeared on with our
invisible begging bowl belonged to my grandmother’s older
sister, Miss Kurien. She would have been in her sixties then. Her
thin, wavy grey hair was cut in a style that used to be called a
pageboy. She wore starched, papery saris with big, loose blouses.
Miss Kurien was far ahead of most women of her time. She was
single, held a master’s degree in English literature and had taught
at a college in Sri Lanka (then Ceylon). She had a home of her own. She had savings, a pension, and all the sagacity and ​­single-​
­mindedness of an unmarried working woman who knew she had
to take care of herself. It’s unlikely she could have foreseen how
many others she would have to look after, too.
My mother assured her that we would stay only as long as
it took for her to find a job. Miss Kurien, who prided herself on
being a good Christian, agreed to let us stay, but made no effort
to hide her disapproval of us and our situation. She did this by
ignoring us and showering her delicate affections on other rela-
tives’ children who visited her. She gave them gifts, played her
piano and sang to them in her quavering voice. Even though she
made it clear that she did not like us (which made us not like her),
she was the one person who helped us out and gave us a roof over
our heads when we most needed it.
My grandmother lived with her, too. Her conical corneas had
deteriorated and she was almost blind by then. She still wore her
dark glasses. Even at night. She had a ridge that ran across her​
­scalp – h​ er famous brass-​­
​­
vase scar. Sometimes she let me run my
finger over it. And sometimes she allowed me to braid her thin
hair into a rat’s tail before she went to bed.
Every evening she would sit on the veranda and play her
violin.
She was an accomplished violinist and had taken music les-
sons when her Imperial Entomologist husband was posted in
Vienna. When her tutor told him that his wife had the potential to become a ​­concert-​­class violinist, he stopped the lessons and, in a
fit of jealous rage, smashed the first violin she owned.

I was too young to tell how well she played, but as darkness
fell in Ayemenem and the sound of crickets swelled, her music
made the evenings and the very dark nights more melancholic
than they already were.
My uncle G. Isaac lived in an annexe attached to the main
house. At first, I was terrified of him. I only knew him as the
tall, fat, angry man who had tried to turn us out of our home in
Ooty. In Ayemenem, though, I began to see him in a new light.
He seemed more interesting and less intimidating. I grew to love
him after he began to take my brother and me down to the river
and teach me to swim by making me paddle in circles around his
stomach.
G. Isaac was one of India’s first Rhodes scholars. His subject
was Greek and Roman mythology. At the dining table he would
suddenly say things like ‘Isn’t it wonderful to have a god of wine
and ecstasy?’ Everybody would look at him blankly. And he would
tell us about Dionysus, or whoever his god of the day was.
After teaching for a few years in a college in Madras, he gave
up his academic career to return to his roots and start a pickle, jam
and curry-​­
​­
powder factory with his mother. It was called the
Malabar Coast Products. They ran it out of the Imperial Ento-
mologist’s family home in Kottayam town which was a short bus
ride away. (This was the house that would become the centre of
the dispute when my mother challenged the Travancore Chris-
tian Succession Act.) G. Isaac, notwithstanding his keen interest
in inheritance and private property, was a Marxist. He said he had
given up his career to start a factory to promote small industry and generate local employment. Fed up with his nonsense, his Swed-
ish wife, Cecilia, who he met in Oxford, left him and returned to
Sweden with their three young sons.
•
In these strange and manifold ways, this constellation of extraor-
dinary, eccentric, cosmopolitan people, defeated by life, converged
on the tiny village of Ayemenem.
The hot, humid climate suited my mother better. Her asthma,
although it remained severe and chronic, improved a little. While
she tried to work out what to do with her life, she h​­ ome-​­schooled
my brother and me. Everyone else mostly ignored us, except
occasionally G. Isaac when he was in a good mood.
Life in Ayemenem was like living on a ledge that we could be
nudged off at any moment. Even Kochu Maria, the cook, would
tell me that we had no right to be living there. She would mutter
and grumble about the shamefulness of having fatherless chil-
dren living under the same roof as decent people. Every few days
the Cosmopolitans would quarrel. When they fought, the whole
house shook. Plates would be smashed; doors broken down. It
was hard to keep track of the relationship between G. Isaac and
my mother. Sometimes they were the best of friends and then,
suddenly, without warning, mortal enemies. Most of the fights
were, unsurprisingly, about money. About how my mother was
not contributing to household expenses, not earning her keep.
G. Isaac took care not to include my brother and me in those
quarrels.
